They played gritty defense — never letting their lead dwindle in the second half — made 19 of 19 free throws and, as in their two previous games, spread the ball, for an impressive 24 assists. It added up to a second straight convincing win over the Philadelphia 76ers, 110-88.

Led by Carmelo Anthony, who had a game-high 21 points, the Knicks moved to 3-0 for the first time since the 1999-2000 season.

Even though this season is in its infancy, Woodson said he enjoyed playing Philadelphia two days in row.

“Our schedule is testing us early, and we have to be ready,” he said.

Woodson gave his team a chance to respond to its first type of adversity early in the game. He thought about calling a timeout when the Knicks fell behind by 10 points in the first quarter but chose not to. Woodson said he wanted to see how his veteran team would respond.

What he saw was his team straightening out its problems on its own.

“He understands that we’re a different team and we’re not going to get rattled by a situation like that,” Tyson Chandler said. “With every bucket, I could hear Jason Kidd and Carmelo saying: ‘Stick to the game plan. Nobody get rattled.’ Slowly, we got comfortable.”

Once the Knicks ran effective sets, they handled the 76ers with ease. By the end of the first quarter, they led by 4 points. They stretched their advantage to 13 by the first timeout of the second half.

“We knew they were a kind of team that was going to let us back in the game,” Anthony said. “Once we slowed them down and got them in the halfcourt, we played some defense and made some shots.”

To have another dominant performance against the 76ers, whom they beat by 16 points on Sunday at Madison Square Garden, the Knicks made some adjustments. One of the biggest changes on offense was finding Ronnie Brewer in the corner for open 3-pointers. He made 3 of 4, and finished with a season-high 13 points.

“He’s done a great job considering he hasn’t played much since the surgery,” Woodson said of Brewer, who had knee surgery seven weeks ago.

The Knicks cut their turnovers (7) in half from Sunday’s game, too. That was the statistic that seemed to please Woodson the most.

“You can’t turn it over on the road and think you’re going to beat anybody,” he said. “We took care of the basketball, and the ball moved freely again.”

Chandler was also better. Woodson said Chandler had looked sluggish Sunday because of flulike symptoms.

On Monday, Chandler played more minutes (28) and seemed to have his stamina back. His improved presence caused more problems for the 76ers. Chandler (14 points, 6 rebounds) controlled the lane and altered a number of shots.

“I felt much better tonight than I did last night,” he said. “When I have my legs under me, I can do more offensively and defensively.”

Spencer Hawes, the only Philadelphia player capable of guarding Chandler, was in foul trouble throughout the second half. That only highlighted how Philadelphia is not a complete team without Andrew Bynum, who has not played this season because of a bruised right knee.

Bynum was the 76ers’ biggest acquisition in the off-season, and his debut with his teammates will create the type of inside-out play that Coach Doug Collins wants.

Chandler and Bynum, when healthy, might be the best centers in the Eastern Conference.

“It’s going to change their team,” Chandler said of Philadelphia’s adding Bynum. “It will change their offense. Right now, they are more perimeter-oriented. I think a lot of that will change and they will slow it down and look for him on the block.”

The next time the Knicks face the 76ers will be here Jan. 26. When the teams play again, maybe the final minutes will be more dramatic. For now, the Knicks’ experience, at home and on the road, has served them well.

REBOUNDS

Marcus Camby (left calf) did not play on Monday. Mike Woodson said he hoped Camby would be ready when the Knicks host the Dallas Mavericks on Friday. “I like to see guys practice a little bit and see how they feel,” Woodson said of Camby, who has yet to even scrimmage this season.

